Hi, everyone, welcome back to database Lecture Series. In this lecture, we want to discuss file organizations and indexing techniques. File organizations and indexing techniques are very important in terms of database concepts and theory. So, I will very briefly introduce what is file organization techniques, and we'll take more time to discuss about database indexes in this lecture.
Before discuss file organization techniques, and indexing techniques, I think it's very important to have this background knowledge about the database files, and how database data from a storage device and how to write data in the storage device. So the background only you can discuss about file organization techniques, our how how they have organized data within files, and what is the use of it, and advantages disadvantages of different file organization techniques and also indexes. So therefore, first, I will sit down some background knowledge. And we'll move into the actual detail part we want to discuss for file organizations and indexing techniques. Now, database users point of view or database developers point of view, what you do you always create a database, that means you are creating tables to store data. So for users, for database developers table, but for software actually, database file, see as example, you are creating employee table. So employee table is a logical database file for the DBMS software. So then, if you look at this database, file, oriens, you table in a different way? Is your table. Your table this structure? Or is your database file is structure. It's a collection of pages, we see this, like you can see from break those things. database pages, database file, is a collection of pages. So if you take database, one page, it's a collection of slots. One is a collection of slots. So if you look at inside the slot that has one record, so then database finally structure is what it's a collection of pages, one pages wide collection of slots. Inside the slot, we have one record record is what actually, we were to use. So this understanding you want to help us as a database developer, you create tables, but you will table for the database systems is simply fine. I'm not talking about operating system file, database file database file is something logical. So then I'm talking here that logical database file structure a collection of pages inside a page is a collection of slots inside the slot. One record is the set of attributes all of you have to have that understanding first. Next, we want to have some idea about what what is the page and this page relate to what in the heart is or is how we can link heart this data and the relationship. You have some idea. We know our database data or is our table data always be stored inside? magnetic this or this? So our data is inside the heart is so and next. data always be stored inside? magnetic this or this? So our data is inside the heart is so and next. 