Hello. Good afternoon. Okay. Can you hear me? Okay. Thanks. Okay. A few more to join, but I think Let's start. They will join later.
I think we have done a few a few analytics related topics in previous lectures.
So we need Association related things, then classification some algorithms and then cluster in one of the algorithm.
So basic things related to analytics we have done.
But when we look at life cycle of analytics related projects, so we want to do the date of preprocessing area.
So therefore, I thought of talking about some technique related to data preprocessing in this lecture.
Let's see some of the techniques we use data preprocessing. So before we use use our data with modules.
So we want to do some for the processing and prepare our data sets to fit into data models.
So some of the things we can discuss with decision.
All right. So this is some overview to data preprocessing.
Mainly we are talking about data quality and the main task we doing data Privacy.
So under the text, I will mainly focus on data cleaning and data. Yeah, mainly data cleaning.
So in addition to that, data integration, data reduction, data transformation and discretization.
So that's also we want to discuss. So mainly we will discuss data cleaning and data transformation and data repetition.
So other two things, data reduction and integration, also in the slide state.
But the main focus is other two topics. All right. One question. Do we need to upload the assignment to the.
So I will discuss it later. So it's not assignment to complete the assignment.
You have time, but I'm not asking you to complete it, but I need to let the group meters and so on for that.
Actually, that will has given not to submitted assignment. Answer. Okay.
I will have to do to spend some time on the lecture so we can move into the assignment related things and we can discuss.
And after that, I will give you some time to work on assignment today because since not on campus classrooms and then you don't meet physically.
So then I want to do some time from the lecture time. So then you can get together and discuss about assignment.
After complete the lecture, I will assign time for that. Okay.
So first before I discuss the main topic, if I explain you very briefly, this KDD process or knowledge discovery database, this process.
So then you can see data preprocessing fit in to where it. So we collect data from different data sources.
And then after that, we are creating a data set for our targeted problem.
And after that, that data set we want to further process to us in our modules.
So the data preprocess income there, then under data preprocessing, actually transformation also there.
And this transform data we use for machine learning data mining models.
And after that, we want to derive patterns or new knowledge from that.